# CS144 notes

### Lecture 1 - Four-layer model

> _We reject: kings, presidents, and voting. We believe in: rough consensus and running code._
>
> David D. Clark 1992

>_in very general terms, the community believes that the goal is connectivity, the tool is the Internet Protocol, and the intelligence is end to end rather than hidden in the network._
>
> B. Carpenter 1996

-  the network layer which uses the Internet Protocol (IP) is the glue which hold the Internet together.

- networked devices can read and write data over a network to communicate across the world.

- The most communication model is a bi-directional, reliable byte stream connection where one side reads what the other side writes.
    - A well-known example is HTTP (hyper-text transfer protocol) where a client opens a connection with a server and sends GET or POST requests for certain files and the server sends 200 OK repsonses with payload.
    - BitTorrent is a peer-to-peer file sharing protocol where a file is shared among multiple peers (Called swarm) and these peers are tracked by a tracker. When you need to download the file shared by a swarm, you setup bidirectional comms channels with peers to exchange information.
    - Skype: interesting problem where we have two clients both requesting data from each other after opening a connection. This is because the NAT (network address translator) prevents other nodes from the Internet from opening a connection to your device when your device already has an open connection to the Internet. We can create a _reverse connection_ between users by using a rendevous/relay server in between to bypass this problem.

- Applications want to communicate without worrying about the route that data takes across the Internet and wants to be confident that data was correctly received (reliability). The 4-layer model helps describe the heirachy of operations required to transmit data between two communicating nodes. These form the building blocks of network communication across the Internet today.
    -  each layer builds on top of another to create a bidirectional reliable byte-stream comms between applications.
    - each layer is modular and completely seperate. each offers a common, well-defined API to the layer below.
    - application layer -> transport layer -> network layer -> link layer
    - _link layer_: The Internet is made up of end-hosts, routers and links. Data is delivered hop-by-hop over each link in packets. Eg: WiFi, Ethernet
    - _network layer_: creates the packets which are delivered end-to-end between source and destination using the Internet Protocol (IP). These are called IP datagrams and are passed down to the link layer. The router in each link has a network layer repsonsible for routing the datagram toward its destination.
    - _transport layer_: IP datagrams can be lost, delivered out of order an be corrupted. The transport layer (most commonly following TCP) solves this issue by guarnteeing reliability. Sometimes, the transport layer uses UDP (user datagram protocol) if reliability is not an issue (eg. video call) as UDP offers no delivery guarantees.
    - _application layer_: this layer specifies applciation-specific semantics(HTTP, BitTorrent, FTP, SMTP) between end-user processes to send bi-directional byte streams.

- Note that the network layer is the "thin waist" of this model as it only offers a single communication protocol: IP.

#### Packet switching principle

#### Layering principles

#### Packaging principle

#### Byte order & ipv4 addresses

#### Longesst Prefix Match

#### Address reosluton protocol (ARP)

### Lecture 2 - Transmission Control Protocol